this is recorded at 3 a.m. local time
let's give a fast and upbeat rundown on
the history of the Indochina Ward's
Vietnam Cambodia Laos one person wrote
to me saying that be interesting to hear
my respect from these wars it seems to
me it's something I talk about all the
time
but the truth is I never did make even
one video focused on telling you my
perspective on the history of this war
naturally I'm gonna focus on least
understood or most misunderstood
elements of the war historically
strategically geopolitically and even
culturally from an American perspective
the war ended in 1975 that's when the
Americans start to evacuate and then
Vietnam declares its official
reunification in 1976 from an Asian
perspectives not from an American
perspective from the perspective someone
living in that continent
watching politics unfold in Vietnam
Cambodia Laos but also China next door
fighting didn't stop in 1975 and didn't
stop in 1976 either in many ways the end
of the war was 1979 when Vietnam was
invaded by communist China that event
for many onlookers many of the people
who were watching politics of Vietnam
unfold many of the people who protested
on one side of the other was a huge
wake-up call to the extent to which the
Western world had never understood and
never really even taken a interest in
what the politics of Vietnam really were
when communist China invaded communist
Vietnam it revealed one of the most
important geopolitical factors that had
been completely consistent since 1954
that basically to simplify a little bit
Mao Zedong and the elite levels of the
Communist Party in China bitterly hated
communist Vietnam if they board allies
they weren't friends they weren't you
know
against the Americans no no no with the
contrary their relationship to Vietnam
and Russia Vietnam and China wasn't what
most people in the West thought it was
and it wasn't even what most American
presidents thought it was there isn't
just the fog of war here there's also
the fog of peace Americans went into the
vietnam war with their mentality very
much prefigured by their experience in
the Korean War the Korean War ends in
1953 the same year that Joseph Stalin
dies the armistice agreement is written
a few months after the death of Joseph
Stalin and these things are indeed
linked from an American perspective I'm
gesturing towards myself I'm in fact
Canadian I'm not American from an
American perspective the crucial factor
shaping their experience of the Korean
War was the entry of Chinese troops was
the Chinese support for the Chinese
backing for the North Koreans the Korean
communists it's natural that the
Americans then rolled on into the
Vietnam War imagining a somewhat similar
scenario presuming that Communist China
was going to support communist Vietnam
in fact if the people in charge in the
United States the various presidents and
heads of intelligence in fact if they'd
had their eyes and ears open they could
have figured out that thus it the stage
being set for the Vietnam War was very
fundamentally different in this respect
and not in this respect only but the
Americans were not really very
interested in the politics of Vietnam
that weren't addressed in the politics
history and culture of Vietnam China
Cambodia Laos or how they were all
connected to each other in the same way
in our own time we can ask to what
extent was George W Bush sincerely
interested in the relationship between
Afghanistan and Pakistan when he
commenced large-scale warfare in
Afghanistan probably not at all probably
he could have known
and could have shaped his planning for
the war he could have known precisely
what the relationship was between the
Taliban and the the Pakistani
authorities the Pakistani intelligence
agencies and so on but if he could have
known he probably chose not to know or
simply put didn't care in the same ways
America got involved with this war with
fundamentally very very little interest
in what the facts on the ground really
were instead America enters into the war
one filled with optimism from their
experience in Japan remember in this
period the American conquest of Japan
was not that long ago and Japan is the
most positive example of regime change
in the history of the world the
Americans had to fight the Japanese very
very hard very bitter combat throughout
World War two but the minute the combat
was over once the Japanese surrendered
to the American side almost overnight
the Japanese adopt a new constitution
they become a democracy they become in
many fundamental ways not just an
American ally but also a outstanding
example of westernization embracing
economic modernity terms of law and
order or the court system the Parliament
the traffic lights the fire hydrants in
so many ways Japan seems to westernize
and embrace capitalism and you know
parliamentary democracy overnight so
that gave the Americans a type of
optimism about what they could
accomplish in conquering Vietnam that
again is just wildly divorced from
reality and of course they could have
known how false that idea was just by
studying the French experience in
Vietnam because the French had an
ongoing
attempt to colonize Vietnam right
through World War two and thereafter
disastrously ending with Battle of Dien
Bien Phu story for another video um so
the Americans have optimism on the basis
of their experience in Japan and they
have some trepidation based on their
experience in Korea North Korea South
Korea the Korean War as we call it you
could say they learned the lessons from
neither of these things but in Korea
their main problem was the Chinese army
entering to support the North Korean the
Korean Communist army okay and their
other big problem of course was Joseph
Stalin the Russians Stalin dies in 1953
and really the whole context for the
Vietnam War the Indochina Wars we should
say he is created by the death of Stalin
and the very peculiar optimism that took
over elite levels of Russian government
for at least a decade thereafter okay
Russia didn't want war the United States
at that time I mean right after the
death of Joseph Stalin Russia was not
entertaining the type of strategic
military options that really would have
prevented the United States or would
have dissuaded the United States from
making Vietnam a major colonial project
shall we say now what do I mean if
Joseph Stalin had kept living which is
of course impossible but if Joseph
Stalin kept living for another 20 years
or if Joseph Stalin had been followed by
another dictator who was identical to
Joseph Stalin the types of options that
dictator would have been looking at
would have been to prevent Americans
having a presence in Vietnam in
Indochina by moving missiles into the
region does anyone remember the Cuban
Missile Crisis you know they could move
missiles whether those are nuclear
missiles
or not they could move the Russian Navy
into the region a very different thing
if US aircraft newest ships were being
countered by another Navy that was
coming in and saying no we're not going
to allow you to run these operations
here and you know of course they could
evoke some principle of international
law or some peace treaty or something
but you know the American you know naval
presence there could have been
challenged by Russia and by the way
let's not forget it could have in theory
been challenged by another country like
India also but no one else historically
in this period would have possibly
challenged the American Empire as it was
starting to expand into Vietnam of all
places and very naked Lee very overtly
the Americans were there expanding into
the power vacuum left by the French
military withdrawing as I've mentioned
in many many videos the French had been
making money out of opium out of heroin
and the French secret service handed
over the heroin business to the CIA
directly technically it was the OSS and
then the OSS was taken over by the CIA
but in any case even the French heroin
producing business made a direct
transition from a French government of
occupation to an American government of
occupation with a very brutal and bloody
Secret Service running that occupation a
great thing to look up to illustrate
this too is Condor Island which I think
in Vietnamese is called a honda island
or kann dowe Island Condor Island there
was a horrible prison there that the
French used to torture and interrogate
anyone who was opposed to their regime
and that was taken over and run by the
CIA by the US military
Farah says that the French legacy went
directly into American hands and without
the Americans questioning to much not
even strategically not even in a
Machiavellian sense you know when you're
handed the keys to a prison and torture
facility apparently you don't really
question in the same way should we come
here and set up a prison and torture
facility it's bizarre but true and I
read at
least one account from a survivor from
Condor Island almost everyone since to
Condor Island was was tortured and then
executed but I read an account from
someone who was imprisoned there and who
actually was released he did who did
survive brutal terrible infamous and the
effects are much more than just bad PR
for the United States for two
generations or something the American
colonial Enterprise in Vietnam totally
discredited them in the world stage for
example in the eyes of a place like
India and guys India really matters the
intense hatred India had towards the
United States of America politically you
know you can imagine if your India
watching from not too close and not too
far away what America is doing in
Vietnam during this period you're
watching these people getting tortured
and India's really wondering to what
extent should they stand up to what
extent should they intervene
India largely you know satisfied itself
with me symbolic protests and
international conferences and so on but
this has very very far-reaching Conquest
consequences for the United States of
America and of course it to a large
extent even discredited democracy simply
because the nature of this brutality was
so terrible and again for the Americans
they're not questioning it seriously
they're not thinking through what
they're doing they have a positive
experience with Japan they have a
negative experience with the Korean War
but they think this time in Vietnam the
same thing won't happen because Stalin
is dead basically and then they also
have this unique situation of stepping
into the shoes of the French Empire for
the French Empire is left so to finish
the point with Joseph Stalin if Stalin
had still been alive or if the regime
continued to be a Stalinist regime in
Russia they could have deployed missiles
that could have deployed the Navy in
front of the US Navy they could have
deployed the air force right
the Russians were very stingy with the
air force in North Korea and Mao Zedong
bitterly resented that that's part of
the split the breakdown which we
China and Russia so again most Americans
at the time did not understand this many
Americans still don't understand it
today
Communist China and communist Russia
were enemies in this period this is
related to the fact that communist China
communist Vietnam or enemies but anyway
theoretically Stalin or some other
Stalinist dictator could have in the
same period deployed aerial backup to
the Vietnamese and if so you can then
imagine the American perspective on
Vietnam Cambodia and Laos would change
obviously I'm not saying they would have
completely given up but they would then
be looking at a strategic calculation
and saying whoa whoa whoa you know we're
not free to deploy our boats and our
aircraft carriers here we're not free to
just bomb this country with no air force
opposing us not really a question of
whether or not they can win of course if
the United States committed all of their
resources to this war they could win but
then they'd be looking at a very
different cost calculation and they
might have been asked themselves wait
what is it we're fighting this war for
anyway what is it were trying to win but
those questions I think it is fair to
say went unasked and unanswered just as
in our own time many of the very obvious
questions what was supposed to happen
what was the best-case scenario in
Afghanistan and in Iraq I think those
questions went unasked than I answer
also so that's the American perspective
the Asian perspective is much more
important China
attended an international conference in
1954 which is called the Geneva
Convention of 1954 so this is after the
death of Joseph Stalin and this is
shortly after peace in Korea it's
technically it's an armistice
technically they're still at war
technically there still is no peace
between South Korea North Korea
nevertheless we can
at the Geneva Conventions of 1954 Mao
Zedong and Joanne lie the elite level of
the Communist Party of China became
deeply committed to an alliance with
Cambodia and this included a close
personal relationship between both of
those Chinese leaders and the king of
Cambodia King C&O so in different
periods of time he has the title of King
Prince
sometimes just Prime Minister or just
leader he actually at one point one
else's the title of King and becomes a
commoner and that probably also
powerfully impressed Mao Zedong he
certainly has many years in which he's
toying with both socialist and communist
philosophy and he lives her many years
of his life in Beijing and there are
innumerable photographs of C&O the king
of Cambodia together with Mao Zedong and
Joanne lie so they became personal
friends but the political commitment
that china makes to support cambodia
starts in 1954 and it never ends it
continues to be an important factor in
world politics even during the Ronald
Reagan administration it goes on and on
and on and it's also the crucial reason
why China invades Vietnam in 1979 now
there is a little bit of a chicken and
egg question here does Communist China
bitterly hate communist Vietnam because
China sympathized with Cambodia trying
to set it to support Cambodia and
basically Cambodia and Vietnam were
enemies simplify but it's not much of a
simplification or is it the case that
China already had this rivalry with
Vietnam already had this hatred for the
Communist Party of Vietnam yeah this is
all communist versus communist struggle
and that that came first that was the
basis for China cultivating this
friendship with Cambodia both a literal
friendship
people and a strategic relationship
doesn't matter yeah I actually have done
enough research that I could venture a
guess but one way or another the
fundamental strategic situation that the
Vietnam War unfolds on it's exactly
created by these powers Russia China
United States France Vietnam Cambodia
allows themselves but anyone looking
back at this history from the detached
perspective can say the single most
important single most decisive power
here was China that was really the
political perspective that mattered and
I mean again especially after the death
of Stalin and given that after that
basically Russia wanted nothing to do
with this part of the world they really
wanted to have as little to do with as
as possible with a Southeast Asia they
did not want to start World War three
over who would be the next government in
Cambodia that was not not Moscow's
perspective and on the contrary Mao
Zedong and Jo and I personally the
leaders in China they were completely
committed to fight however many wars
were necessary to settle as they would
put it the Cambodian issue or the
Cambodia problem so the importance of
that is again incredibly obvious but did
Nixon care even you know as well Nixon
sorry Nixon as many many years later
we're starting the story we're talking
about Eisenhower you know do you think
Eisenhower cared so I mean it's many
years later we're talking about about
Nixon and his Israel in this but in the
earlier period of this history you know
the people at an elite level in in the
American politics if they could have
known this stuff they wouldn't know they
didn't care anyway the tragedy that was
to unfold after that thereafter again it
really reflects the sort of strange
optimism and lack of
of all the different parties the
Russians don't really want to do
anything about it I mean other countries
in Europe like France and Germany really
fundamentally don't care
Japan doesn't care India doesn't care
these are all countries that could have
been involved and you know yes the
United States they did indeed propellent
this theory it was actually to my
knowledge JFK was the first guy to set
it down to actually pronounce this
theory the first president stays to do
so the domino theory that if they did
this stand up and stop communism for
taking over Vietnam then Thailand would
be next that communism will continue to
take over the rest of Southeast Asia and
of course this theory is bizarre or it's
a very weak form of propaganda in many
ways but it fundamentally ignores the
extent to which to quote Richard Nixon
himself China was the biggest domino of
all I mean you know if you're putting
China in a situation where they can or
must invade and occupy Vietnam parallel
to during the Korean War
you put China position where they can
and must invade and occupy Korea the
meaning of the American kind of colonial
conquering venture in Vietnam Laos
Cambodia it starts to become meaningless
just in terms of a matter of scale if
that's what you're gonna force China to
do and they're gonna do it then we all
know what the consequences would be for
these much smaller countries in
Southeast Asia and again imagine you're
explaining this history to a space alien
from Mars space alien is leading this
history and says well if France is
abandoning these colonies if France is
giving up on their colonization of
Indochina and to be clear the French
were briefly replaced by the Japanese
the Japanese briefly conquered these
places in to some extent set up
governments for them Japanese had stain
some postal offices or you know their
occupation of Laos it's ridiculous it's
true very briefly the Japanese to go
with the government laughs wouldn't it
make sense a Martian might ask what did
make sense for the next colonial power
replacing the French replacing the
Japanese to be China why would it be the
United States why would Washington DC be
the next colonial power to come in so
China was also of course looking at this
whole situation with the presumption
that their fear of power their sphere of
influence we now expand and there's no
doubt at least at a lower level of the
Communist Party there's no doubt that
the death of Joseph Stalin created the
expectation that China's power would
expand that Mao Zedong's personal
influence would expand precisely because
he no longer had the competition of
Joseph Stalin as the presumptive leader
of international communism as a movement
now I just note Mao Zedong himself did
not see the situation that way we know
that for a fact is the people work is
extensive that wasn't actually his
personal perspective but of course any
given journalists could see it that way
and party cadres are Mitton ordinary
people most likely did see this as the
period where Mao Mao Zedong's importance
was growing and China's importance was
growing whereas Russia's importance
would wane or reduce and this is also
the period of the sino-soviet split one
other really important personal and
political note I think I mentioned
earlier that China bitterly resented the
fact that the Russians never really
committed to provide airplanes air
support in the Korean War
well guess whose son died as a result
Mao Zedong's own son his number-one son
as they say Mao Zedong had two sons but
one of them was mentally disabled but
Mao Zedong had a son who was not
mentally disabled it was very much
receiving an elite education being
prepared to be
a leader of China itself metronomic Mao
Zedong had a son who was you know either
gonna inherit the dictatorship or at
least go on to be an important person in
the Communist Party and he died fighting
in Korea and nominally as well as
actually he died because the Russians
let them down the Russians didn't
provide the airplanes that would have
prevented the Americans from from
bombing and of course a large part of
the tragedy of Cambodia Vietnam Laos was
precisely that the Americans bombed and
bombed and bombed the country I used to
live in Laos is the most heavily bombed
country in the history of the world more
bombs were dropped on Laos than were
dropped on Germany during World War two
more bombs were dropped on Laos than
were dropped on Japan during World War
two and Laos in case you didn't know is
an incredibly tiny country so this
ongoing saturation bombing the
unchallenged use of aerial supremacy of
airplane you know airplanes in war had
this unbelievably devastating impact on
these countries and of course a body
count of over 1 million persons so
taking this longer view and having drawn
attention these strategic elements that
Americans of the time ignored and that
most people still today don't think
about or don't know death of Joseph
Stalin the cessation of hostilities in
Korea the importance of both Korea and
Japan and prefiguring the American
attitude but for China
by contrast the importance of Cambodia
in prefiguring China's attitude that
China goes into this period from 1954 to
1979 China is supporting Cambodia and is
an enemy of Vietnam the whole Western
world is ignoring this they just don't
care
the reality is China is not a real
genuine supporter of the Nohr
Vietnamese despite propaganda to the
contrary and this is finally ultimately
shown in open war between China and
Vietnam and this is what set the stage
for the war to be possible to unfold as
it did and it's what ultimately he
created the conditions for the war to
end how does the war end why does the
war end the war ends because Nixon comes
to a pact with China
Nixon realizes the gravity and the depth
of China's war with the Soviet Union now
it was a war technically what can I call
it I can't call it a cold war term cold
war it's already taken this was what
created the the strategic triangle or
some people called the Iron Triangle
areas other names for it but for the
first time the United States of America
and communist China would become
strategic allies against Russia now you
can imagine the whole history of the
world today would be different if
Richard Nixon had instead chosen to
become an ally with the Russians against
China fundamentally the reason for
Nixon's decision I had to do with his
face-to-face relationships Nixon was
vice president under Eisenhower and in
that period Nixon had many face to face
diplomatic interactions with the
Russians including a visit of the
Russian leader to the United States
where Nixon was really the guy who spent
a lot of time with him and his entourage
I think partly just cuz you know
Eisenhower was more elderly and so on
Nixon knew the Russians face-to-face
basically his whole political career and
indeed looking back now you really have
to wonder especially given this is the
the relatively optimistic post now on
his period why didn't mix in instead to
get into alliance with the Russians
against the Chinese well as you guys
probably know the Alliance the United
States American China
began with a ping-pong match this is the
part that makes it at the textbooks the
ping-pong match led to secret
face-to-face meetings between elite
level leaders in China and United States
America ultimately Nixon and his wife
personally go to China meet with Mao
Zedong and Jill and Lai and seal this
strategic pact that would go on to cost
yet more millions of lives this would be
peace but peace paid for in blood to a
ridiculous extent Nixon understands that
the Chinese are fundamentally enemies of
the Russians the Chinese are
fundamentally enemies of the Vietnamese
and the linchpin it all turns on his
Cambodia and that is why the Vietnam War
ends with the commencement of
hostilities of unbelievable intensity in
Cambodia and in those hostilities the
surreal fact the matter is the United
States of America and the Communists Pol
Pot regime are on the same side because
they represent the pro Chinese side
fighting against the pro-russian side as
basically Vietnam and Laos decided to
remain loyal to Russia rather than
switching their allegiance to Mao Zedong
in China so an unbelievably bloody
exercise in which millions of people
were killed
the most fundamental error of all was
that the Americans went into this long
series of wars with the mentality of us
versus them they never really had a
mentality of democracy versus
dictatorship they never had a mentality
of human rights versus despotism the
agenda that the United States operated
on and under the leadership of you know
really old-school war mongers who had
lived through World War Two and it lived
through the Korean or I think they
genuinely had the
illusion that if they could just conquer
Vietnam enough after the regime change
like Japan the whole country would be
transformed into a business-friendly
pro-american democracy they were not
willing to entertain the depressing
possibility that Japan was not the
example that proves the rule but Japan
was the exception that proves the rule